# COVID-19-modelling
MSc Data Science project 2020

#Motivation:
Humans have always been affected by one disease outbreak or the other. Epidemic and pandemic are the words that are used to describe the disease outbreak over certain time \cite{Carolyn}. Disease outbreak is called pandemic when it causes massive deaths over a vast geographical area \cite{SHERSTINSKY2020132306}. Over the past century pandemics occurrence have increased due to factors such as world-wide travel access, urbanisation and misuse of natural resources \cite{Morse}. An estimate of 17 to 100 million people died due to the outbreak of Spanish Flu in 1918 \cite{Spreeuwenberg}. Since then, there have been several pandemic outbreaks in recent years such as acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in 2002, H1N1 influenza in 2009 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in 2012 \cite{Hanumanthu}. They all target the human respiratory system and are caused by Coronavirus family. 

In December 2019, large cases of Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia (NCIP) were recorded in Wuhan, China \cite{Li}.Although intially diagonsed as pneumonia, the cases grew rapidly and WHO predicted the onset of potential novel coronavirus outbreak and named it 2019 Novel(New) Coronavirus (COVID-19) or (2019-nCoV) \cite{WHO2020}. The reproduction number (R number)is the basic concept of any communicable diseases \cite{Arino2007}.The R number can be referred as basic reproduction number (R0) or effective reproduction number (Re). R0 is the average number of secondary cases that can be generated by one primary case assuming the majority of population are susceptible. R0 is the key measure of transmissibility of the disease and determines the number of people that are likely to be infected \cite{Driessche2017}.This value is very useful in determining whether and how fast an infectious disease can spread through the population. R0 value above 1 is If one infected person can pass it to two others in the population, the R0 is 2. In a certain population, if the average R0 is greater than 1, the infection in believed to spread exponentially and likewise if the R0 is less than 1, the infection will spread slowly. Strict measures were taken to take this R0 number down in countries world-wide. R0 value also depends on the data that have been used. R0 can be affected by different factors. With the limited data, in February the mean R0 for COVID-19 in China  was estimated to be 3.28 which was still higher than SARS coronavirus \cite{Liu2020}.Re is the number of people that can be infected by an individual at any specific time. This changes as the population becomes immune through natural immunity or vaccination. Re can also be affected by the population behaviour Re can also be affected by various factors and can change dramatically with social behaviours such as self-isolation and social-distancing. R0 and Re are often confused or just referred to as the R number. In UK, the R number was dramatically reduced to 0.62 from 2.6 based on all types of contacts after the lockdown measures were taken \cite{Jarvis2020}.

#Problem Statement:
The source of these novel coronavirus cases were linked to the seafood and animal market in Wuhan, China initially. The origin of this disease is still unknown but it is believed to be a zoonotic disease \cite{ROTHAN2020102433}. By January 30 2020, there were 7734 cases in China alone and around 90 cases in total were reported from other parts of the world including some countries in Europe \cite{Bassetti2020}. As of June 16 2020, virus has spread in 216 countries infecting more than 7 million people and causing over 400,000 deaths \cite{WHO2020} and this number will go up with the ongoing pandemic. Since it is a novel virus, the features that define the course of epidemic is poorly understood. In order to control the disease outbreak, it is essential to know the epidemiological details such as mode of transmission and pathogen features. However, the pathogens causing different diseases vary in these features making it difficult to understand the novel outbreak. As COVID-19 infected vast majority of the world in a short span of time, it was essential to come up with solutions to reduce and stop the infection rates. Scientists and mathematicians around the world battled to come up with models that could help policy makers to make decisions on the spread of COVID-19. Mathematical modelling plays an important role in forecasting the disease outbreak and help policy makers to make decisions wisely. However, over relying on modelling can lead to inaccurate predictions which might be harmful, especially in the case of this novel virus. Relying on the data collected in real time is the only choice since historical data is not available for COVID-19. However, it is not certain that the documentation and reporting of the data is universal and accurate in all areas. Models that can accomodate these insuffiecient data information are important in this case to generate epidemiological insights. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, there has been a lot of papers published  on forecasting the pandemic. Government advisors are relying on modelling to make decisions for COVID-19. The initial Imperial team's model which suggested that COVID-19 would be as severe as influenza turned out to be incorrect and an updated model showed that there could 500,000 and 2.2 million deaths in UK and USA respectively if no action was taken (Ferguson et al., 2020). This helped government to make strict rules to avoid the spread of this virus and save more lives. Robustness of the models can be tested by comparing different models \cite{Pitzer2012}; \cite{HUPPERT2013}. However, it might take years to find the best model for this novel virus. 

#Aims and Objectives:
The main aim of this project is to use deep learning technique to understand COVID-19 pandemic.
The main objectives are as follows:
1) To investigate and critically evaluate pandemic modelling literature available
2) To develop strong and deep understanding of Machine Learning/deep-learning techniques and how to apply it for forecasting COVID-19
3) To explore and visualise available public dataset related to COVID-19
4) To build an experimental framework to forecast the spread of disease in one or more countries/regions
5) To evaluate, and report results with technical documentation

